What, Lucius, ho!
I cannot, by the progress of thestars,
give guess how near to day.
Lucius, I say!
I would it were my fault tosleep so soundly.
When, Lucius, when?
Awake, I say!
What, Lucius!
Call'd you, my lord?
Get me a taper in my study,Lucius.
When it is lighted, come andcall me here.
I will, my lord.
It must be by his death, and,for my part,
I know no personal cause tospurn at him,
but for the general.
He would be crown'd:
how that might change hisnature, there's the question.
It is the bright day that bringsforth the adder
and that craves wary walking.
Crown him that,
and then, I grant, we put asting in him
that at his will he may dodanger with.
The abuse of greatness is whenit disjoins remorse from power,
and, to speak truth of Caesar,
I have not known when hisaffections
sway'd more than his reason.
But 'tis a common proof
that lowliness is youngambition's ladder,
whereto the climber-upward turnshis face;
but when he once attains theupmost round,
he then unto the ladder turnshis back, looks in the clouds,
scorning the base degrees bywhich he did ascend.
So Caesar may; then, lest hemay, prevent.
And, since the quarrel will bearno color for the thing he is,
fashion it thus, that what heis, augmented,
would run to these and theseextremities;
and therefore think him as aserpent's egg
which hatch'd would as his kindgrow mischievous,
and kill him in the shell.
The taper burneth in yourcloset, sir.
Searching the window for a flint
I found this paper thus seal'dup,
and I am sure it did not liethere when I went to bed.
Get you to bed again, it is notday.
Is not tomorrow, boy, the idesof March?
I know not, sir.
Look in the calendar and bringme word.
I will, sir.
"Brutus, thou sleep'st: awakeand see thyself.
Shall Rome, et cetera.
Speak, strike, redress!"
"Brutus, thou sleep'st: awake."
Such instigations have beenoften dropp'd
where I have took them up.
"Shall Rome, et cetera."
Thus must I piece it out.
Shall Rome stand under one man'sawe?
What, Rome?
My ancestors did from thestreets of Rome
the Tarquin drive, when he wascall'd a king.
"Speak, strike, redress."
Am I entreated to speak andstrike?
O Rome, I make thee promise, ifthe redress will follow,
thou receivest thy full petitionat the hand of Brutus!
Sir, March is wasted fifteendays.
'Tis good.
Go to the gate, somebody knocks.
Since Cassius first did whet meagainst Caesar I have not slept.
Between the acting of a dreadfulthing and the first motion,
all the interim is like aphantasma or a hideous dream;
the genius and the mortalinstruments are then in council,
and the state of man, like to alittle kingdom,
suffers then the nature of aninsurrection.
Sir, 'tis your brother Cassiusat the door,
who doth desire to see you.
Is he alone?
No, sir, there are more withhim.
Do you know them?
No, sir, their hats are pluck'dabout their ears,
and half their faces buried intheir cloaks,
that by no means I may discoverthem by any mark of favor.
Let 'em enter.
They are the faction.
O Conspiracy, shamest thou
to show thy dangerous brow bynight,
when evils are most free?
O, then, by day where wilt thoufind a cavern dark enough
to mask thy monstrous visage?
Seek none, Conspiracy; hide itin smiles and affability;
for if thou path, thy nativesemblance on,
not Erebus itself were dimenough to hide thee
from prevention.
I think we are too bold uponyour rest.
Good morrow, Brutus, do wetrouble you?
I have been up this hour, awakeall night.
Know I these men that come alongwith you?
Yes, every man of them, and noman here but honors you,
and every one doth wish you hadbut that opinion of yourself
which every noble Roman bears ofyou.
This is Trebonius.
He is welcome hither.
This, Decius Brutus.
He is welcome too.
This, Casca; this, Cinna; andthis, Metellus Cimber.
They are all welcome.
What watchful cares do interposethemselves
betwixt your eyes and night?
Shall I entreat a word?
Here lies the east.
Doth not the day break here?
No.
O, pardon, sir, it doth,
and yon grey lines that fret theclouds are messengers of day.
You shall confess that you areboth deceived.
Here, as I draw my sword, thesun arises,
which is a great way growing onthe south,
weighing the youthful season ofthe year.
Some two months hence up highertoward the north
he first presents his fire,
and the high east stands as theCapitol, directly here.
Give me your hands all over, oneby one.
And let us swear our resolution.
No, not an oath.
If not the face of men, thesufferance of our souls,
the time's abuse--
if these be motives weak,breakoff betimes,
and every man hence to his idlebed;
so let high-sighted tyrannyrange on
till each man drop by lottery.
But if these, as I am sure theydo,
bear fire enough to kindlecowards
and to steel with valor themelting spirits of women,
then, countrymen, what need weany spur but our own cause
to prick us to redress?
What other bond than secretRomans that have spoke the word
and will not palter?
And what other oath than honestyto honesty engaged
that this shall be or we willfall for it?
Swear priests and cowards andmen cautelous,
old feeble carrions
and such suffering souls thatwelcome wrongs;
unto bad causes swear suchcreatures as men doubt;
but do not stain the even virtueof our enterprise,
nor the insuppressive mettle ofour spirits,
to think that or our cause orour performance
did need an oath;
when every drop of blood thatevery Roman bears,
and nobly bears, is guilty of aseveral bastardy
if he do break the smallestparticle of any promise
that hath pass'd from him.
But what of Cicero?
Shall we sound him?
I think he will stand verystrong with us.
Oh, let us not leave him out.
No, by no means.
O, let us have him,
for his silver hairs willpurchase us a good opinion,
and buy men's voices to commendour deeds.
It shall be said his judgementruled our hands;
our youths and wildness shall nowhit appear,
but all be buried in hisgravity.
O, name him not; let us notbreak with him,
for he will never followanything that other men begin.
Then leave him out.
Indeed he is not fit.
Shall no man else be touch'd butonly Caesar?
Decius, well urged.
I think it is not meet MarkAntony,
so well beloved of Caesar,should outlive Caesar.
We shall find of him a shrewdcontriver;
and you know his means, if heimprove them,
may well stretch so far as toannoy us all,
which to prevent, let Antony andCaesar fall together.
Our course will seem too bloody,Caius Cassius,
to cut the head off and thenhack the limbs
like wrath in death and envyafterwards;
for Antony is but a limb ofCaesar.
Let's be sacrificers, but notbutchers, Caius.
We all stand up against thespirit of Caesar,
and in the spirit of men thereis no blood.
O, that we then could come byCaesar's spirit,
and not dismember Caesar.
But, alas, Caesar must bleed forit.
And, gentle friends, let's killhim boldly, but not wrathfully;
let's carve him as a dish fitfor the gods,
not hew him as a carcass fit forhounds;
and let our hearts, as subtlemasters do,
stir up their servants to an actof rage
and after seem to chide 'em.
This shall make our purposenecessary and not envious,
which so appearing to the commoneyes,
we shall be call'd purgers, notmurderers.
And for Mark Antony, think notof him,
for he can do no more
than Caesar's arm when Caesar'shead is off.
Yet I fear him,
for in the ingrated love hebears to Caesar--
Alas, good Cassius, do not thinkof him.
If he love Caesar, all that hecan do is to himself,
take thought and die for Caesar.
And that were much he should,
for he is given to sports, towildness, and much company.
There is no fear in him-- lethim not die,
for he will live and laugh atthis hereafter.
Peace, count the clock.
The clock hath stricken three.
'Tis time to part.
But it is doubtful yet
whether Caesar will come forthtoday or no,
for he is superstitious grown oflate,
quite from the main opinion heheld once of fantasy,
of dreams, and ceremonies.
It may be these apparentprodigies,
the unaccustom'd terror of thisnight,
and the persuasion of hisaugurers
may hold him from the Capitoltoday.
Never fear that.
If he be so resolved, I cano'ersway him,
for he loves to hear
that unicorns can be betray'dwith trees,
and bears with glasses,elephants with holes,
lions with toils, and men withflatterers;
but when I tell him he hatesflatterers,
he says he does, being then mostflattered.
Let me work; for I can give hishumor the true bent,
and I will bring him to theCapitol.
Nay, we will all of us be thereto fetch him.
By the eighth hour.
Is that the utter most?
Be that the uttermost, and failnot then.
Caius Ligarius doth bear Caesarhard,
who rated him for speaking wellof Pompey.
I wonder none of you havethought of him.
Now, good Metellus, go along byhim.
He loves me well, and I havegiven him reasons;
send him but hither, and I'llfashion him.
The morning comes upon us.
We'll leave you, Brutus, and,friends, disperse yourselves,
but all remember what you havesaid
and show yourselves true Romans.
Good gentlemen, look fresh andmerrily;
let not our looks put on ourpurposes,
but bear it as our Roman actorsdo,
with untired spirits and formalconstancy.
And so, good morrow to you everyone.
Boy.
Lucius.
Fast asleep?
It is no matter.
Enjoy the honey-heavy dew ofslumber;
thou hast no figures nor nofantasies,
which busy care draws in thebrains of men;
therefore thou sleep'st sosound.
Brutus, my lord.
Portia, what mean you?
Wherefore rise you now?
It is not for your health thusto commit your weak condition
to the raw cold morning.
Nor for yours neither.
You have ungently, Brutus, stolefrom my bed;
and yesternight at supper yousuddenly arose
and walk'd about, musing andsighing, with your arms across;
and when I ask'd you what thematter was,
you stared upon me with ungentlelooks.
I urged you further; then youscratch'd your head,
and too impatiently stamp'd withyour foot.
Yet I insisted, yet you answer'dnot,
but with an angry wafture ofyour hand
gave sign for me to leave you.
So I did, fearing to strengthenthat impatience
which seem'd too much enkindled,
and withal hoping it was but aneffect of humor,
which sometime hath his hourwith every man.
It will not let you eat, nortalk, nor sleep,
and, could it work so much uponyour shape
as it hath much prevail'd onyour condition,
I should not know you, Brutus.
Dear my lord, make me acquaintedwith your cause of grief.
I am not well in health, andthat is all.
Brutus is wise, and, were he notin health,
he would embrace the means tocome by it.
Why, so I do.
Good Portia, go to bed.
Is Brutus sick, and is itphysical to walk unbraced
and suck up the humors of thedank morning?
What, is Brutus sick,
and will he steal out of hiswholesome bed
to dare the vile contagion ofthe night
and tempt the rheumy andunpurged air
to add unto his sickness?
No, my Brutus, you have somesick offense within your mind,
which by the right and virtue ofmy place I ought to know of;
and, upon my knees, I charm you,by my once commended beauty,
by all your vows of love
and that great vow which didincorporate and make us one,
that you unfold to me, yourself,your half,
why you are heavy and what mentonight have had resort to you;
for here have been some six orseven,
who did hide their faces evenfrom darkness.
Kneel not, gentle Portia.
I should not need, if you weregentle Brutus.
Within the bond of marriage,tell me, Brutus,
is it excepted I should know nosecrets that appertain to you?
Am I yourself but, as it were,in sort or limitation,
to keep with you at meals,comfort your bed,
and talk to you sometimes?
Dwell I but in the suburbs ofyour good pleasure?
If it be no more, Portia isBrutus' harlot, not his wife.
You are my true and honorablewife, as dear to me
as are the ruddy drops thatvisit my sad heart.
If this were true, then should Iknow this secret.
I grant I am a woman,
but withal a woman that LordBrutus took to wife.
but withal a woman well reputed,Cato's daughter.
Think you I am no stronger thanmy sex,
being so father'd and sohusbanded?
Tell me your counsels.
I will not disclose 'em.
I have made strong proof of myconstancy,
giving myself a voluntary woundhere in the thigh.
Can I bear that with patienceand not my husband's secrets?
O ye gods, render me worthy ofthis noble wife!
Hark, hark, one knocks.
Portia, go in awhile,
and by and by thy bosom shallpartake the secrets of my heart.
All my engagements I willconstrue to thee,
all the charactery of my sadbrows.
Leave me with haste.
Lucius, who's that knocks?
Here is a sick man that wouldspeak with you.
Caius Ligarius, that Metellusspoke of.
Boy, stand aside.
Caius Ligarius, how?
Vouchsafe good morrow from afeeble tongue.
O, what a time have you choseout, brave Caius, to wear akerchief.
Would you were not sick.
I am not sick, if Brutus have inhand
any exploit worthy the name ofhonor.
Such an exploit have I in hand,Ligarius,
had you a healthful ear to hearof it.
By all the gods that Romans bowbefore,
I here discard my sickness.
Soul of Rome.
Brave son, derived fromhonorable loins.
Thou, like an exorcist, hastconjured up my mortified spirit.
Now bid me run, and I willstrive with things impossible,
yea, get the better of them.
What's to do?
A piece of work that will makesick men whole.
But are not some whole that wemust make sick?
That must we also.
What it is, my Caius, I shallunfold to thee,
as we are going to whom it mustbe done.
Set on your foot, and with aheart new-fired I follow you,
to do I know not what;
but it sufficeth that Brutusleads me on.
Follow me then.
Nor heaven nor earth have beenat peace tonight.
Thrice hath Calpurnia in hersleep cried out,
"Help, ho, They murther Caesar."
Ho there.
My lord?
Go bid the priests do presentsacrifice,
and bring me their opinions ofsuccess.
I will, my lord.
What mean you, Caesar?
Think you to walk forth?
You shall not stir out of yourhouse today.
Caesar shall forth:
the things that threaten'd mene'er look'd but on my back;
when they shall see the face ofCaesar, they are vanished.
Caesar, I never stood onceremonies,
yet now they fright me.
There is one within,
besides the things that we haveheard and seen,
recounts most horrid sights seenby the watch.
A lioness hath whelped in thestreets;
and graves have yawn'd, andyielded up their dead;
fierce fiery warriors fight uponthe clouds,
in ranks and squadrons and rightforms of war,
which drizzled blood upon theCapitol;
the noise of battle hurtled inthe air,
horses did neigh and dying mendid groan,
and ghosts did shriek and squealabout the streets.
O Caesar!
These things are beyond all use,and I do fear them.
What can be avoided whose end ispurposed by the mighty gods?
Yet Caesar shall go forth,
for these predictions are to theworld in general as to Caesar.
When beggars die, there are nocomets seen;
the heavens themselves blazeforth the death of princes.
Cowards die many times beforetheir deaths;
the valiant never taste of deathbut once.
Of all the wonders that I yethave heard,
it seems to me most strange thatmen should fear
seeing that death, a necessaryend,
will come when it will come.
What say the augurers?
They would not have you to stirforth today.
Plucking the entrails of anoffering forth,
they could not find a heartwithin the beast.
The gods do this in shame ofcowardice.
Caesar should be a beast withouta heart
if he should stay at home todayfor fear.
No, Caesar shall not.
Danger knows full well
Caesar is more dangerous thanhe.
We are two lions litter'd in oneday,
and I the elder and moreterrible.
And Caesar shall go forth.
Alas, my lord, your wisdom isconsumed in confidence.
Do not go forth today.
Call it my fear that keeps youin the house and not your own.
We'll send Mark Antony to theSenate House,
and he shall say you are notwell today.
Let me, upon my knee, prevail inthis.
Mark Antony shall say I am notwell,
and, for thy humor, I will stayat home.
Here's Decius Brutus, he shalltell them so.
Caesar, all hail!
Good morrow, worthy Caesar!
I come to fetch you to theSenate House.
And you are come in very happytime
to bear my greeting to thesenators
and tell them that I will notcome today.
Cannot, is false, and that Idare not, falser:
I will not come today; tell themso, Decius.
Say he is sick.
Shall Caesar send a lie?
Have I in conquest stretch'dmine arm so far
to be afeard to tell greybeardsthe truth?
Decius, tell them Caesar willnot come.
Most mighty Caesar, let me knowsome cause,
lest I be laugh'd at when I tellthem so.
The cause is in my will: I willnot come.
That is enough to satisfy theSenate.
But, for your privatesatisfaction,
because I love you, I will letyou know.
Calpurnia here, my wife, staysme at home;
she dreamt tonight she saw mystatue,
which, like a fountain with anhundred spouts,
did run pure blood, and manylusty Romans
came smiling and did bathe theirhands in it.
And these does she apply forwarnings and portents
and evils imminent, and on herknee
hath begg'd that I will stay athome today.
This dream is all amissinterpreted;
it was a vision fair andfortunate.
Your statue spouting blood inmany pipes,
in which so many smiling Romansbathed,
signifies that from you greatRome shall suck reviving blood,
and that great men shall pressfor tinctures, stains,
relics, and cognizance.
This by Calpurnia's dream issignified.
And this way have you wellexpounded it.
I have, when you have heard whatI can say.
And know it now, the Senate haveconcluded
to give this day a crown tomighty Caesar.
If you shall send them word youwill not come,
their minds may change.
Besides, it were a mock apt tobe render'd,
for someone to say "Break up theSenate till another time,
when Caesar's wife shall meetwith better dreams."
If Caesar hide himself, shallthey not whisper,
"Lo, Caesar is afraid"?
Pardon me, Caesar, for my deardear love to your proceeding
bids me tell you this, andreason to my love is liable.
How foolish do your fears seemnow, Calpurnia.
I am ashamed I did yield tothem.
Give me my robe, for I will go.
And look where Publius is cometo fetch me.
Good morrow, Caesar.
Welcome, Publius.
What, Brutus, are you stirr'd soearly too?
Good morrow, Casca.
Caius Ligarius, Caesar was ne'erso much your enemy
as that same ague which hathmade you lean.
What is't o'clock?
Caesar, 'tis strucken eight.
I thank you for your pains andcourtesy.
See, Antony, that revels long o'nights, is notwithstanding up.
Good morrow, Antony.
So to most noble Caesar.
Bid them prepare within.
I am to blame to be thus waitedfor.
Now, Cinna; now, Metellus; what,Trebonius,
I have an hour's talk in storefor you;
remember that you call on metoday;
be near me, that I may rememberyou.
Caesar, I will.
And so near will I be that yourbest friends
shall wish I had been further.
Good friends, go in and tastesome wine with me,
and we like friends willstraightway go together.
That every like is not the same,O Caesar,
The heart of Brutus yearns tothink upon.
"Caesar, beware of Brutus; takeheed of Cassius;
"come not near Casca; have aneye to Cinna;
"trust not Trebonius; mark wellMetellus Cimber;
"Decius Brutus loves thee not;
"thou hast wronged CaiusLigarius.
"There is but one mind in allthese men,
"and it is bent against Caesar.
"If thou beest not immortal,look about you.
"Security gives way toconspiracy.
"The mighty gods defend thee.
Thy lover, Artemidorus."
Here will I stand till Caesarpass along,
and as a suitor will I give himthis.
My heart laments that virtuecannot live
out of the teeth of emulation.
If thou read this, O Caesar,thou mayest live;
if not, the Fates with traitorsdo contrive.
I prithee, boy, run to theSenate House;
stay not to answer me, but getthee gone.
Why dost thou stay?
To know my errand, madam.
I would have had thee there, andhere again,
ere I can tell thee what thoushouldst do there.
O constancy, be strong upon myside!
Set a huge mountain 'tween myheart and tongue!
I have a man's mind, but awoman's might.
How hard it is for women to keepcounsel.
Art thou here yet?
Madam, what should I do?
Run to the Capitol, and nothingelse?
And so return to you, andnothing else?
Yes, bring me word, boy, if thylord look well,
for he went sickly forth; andtake good note
what Caesar doth, what suitorspress to him.
Hark, boy, what noise is that?
I hear none.
Prithee, listen well.
I heard a bustling rumor like afray,
and the wind brings it from theCapitol.
Sooth, madam, I hear nothing.
Come hither, fellow; which wayhast thou been?
At mine own house, good lady.
What is't o'clock?
About the ninth hour, lady.
Is Caesar yet gone to theCapitol?
Madam, not yet.
I go to take my stand to see himpass on to the Capitol.
Thou hast some suit to Caesar,hast thou not?
That I have, lady.
If it will please Caesar to beso good to Caesar as to hear me,
I shall beseech him to befriendhimself.
Why, know'st thou any harm'sintended towards him?
None that I know will be, muchthat I fear may chance.
Good morrow to you.
Here the street is narrow,
the throng that follows Caesaron the heels of senators,
of praetors, common suitors,
will crowd a feeble man almostto death.
I'll get me to a place more void
and there speak to great Caesaras he comes along.
Ay me, how weak a thing theheart of woman is!
O Brutus, the heavens speed theein thine enterprise!
Sure, the boy heard me.
Brutus hath a suit that Caesarwill not grant.
O, I grow faint.
Run, Lucius, and commend me tomy lord; say I am merry.
Come to me again, and bring meword what he doth say to thee.